Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about DOGE, the
Department of Governmental Efficiency.
It was established by Executive
Order on Donald Trump’s first
day back in office and has been
plagued by controversy ever since.
So, in this episode, we’ll look at what
it did, what it still does, why it is
loved and loathed in almost equal measure,
and ask ourselves what happens next.
OK then, let’s get right
into it and talk about DOGE.
On Saturday, 22nd February, earlier
this year, millions of American
federal employees got the same email.
It was, on one level, a simple request.
It asked them to list five things
that they achieved that week.
They shouldn’t disclose any
classified information, and
simple bullet points were fine.
The email came from the OPM, the Office
of Personnel Management, which is the
US government’s human resources agency.
However, a quick glance at social
media revealed the ultimate source
of the email and the potential
consequences of not responding.
At 8.30 pm that evening, Elon Musk
posted on X, “Consistent with President
@realDonaldTrump’s instructions, all
federal employees will shortly receive
an email requesting to understand what
they got done last week. Failure to
respond will be taken as a resignation.”
This was just over a month into the
establishment of DOGE, the Department
of Governmental Efficiency, and was
one of its most controversial acts.
To some, it was a perfectly fair request.
These were federal employees, people
whose salaries are paid by taxpayers, so
they should be answerable to the public.
And this was hardly a difficult
question to answer: list five
things they did that week.
To others, it was a crude,
politically-charged request, an act of
intimidation dressed up as accountability,
less about measuring productivity and more
about reminding people who held the power.
And there was immediate confusion
among federal employees, the government
workers who received the email.
Should they respond?
What would happen if they didn’t?
Some heads of federal agencies instructed
their employees not to respond,
others instructed them to respond,
others to respond, but to their direct
manager, not to the original email.
Later that week, it was reported that
around 1 million federal employees had
responded to the email, but that still
left around 1.5 million who had not.
One of those who did respond was the White
House Press Secretary, Karoline Leavitt.
She proudly declared that she had
responded, saying, “I do five things in
about 10 minutes, and all federal workers
should be working at the same pace that
President Trump is working and moving.
We have a country to save, and we want
this federal government to be responsive
to the needs of the American people.”
The message was clear:  to “Make America
Great Again”, lazy federal employees
needed to pick up the pace, and the
waste and inefficiency that had been
tolerated under previous administrations,
both Democratic and Republican, was
no longer going to cut the mustard.
America needed to be saved, and
everyone had to pull their weight.
Now, before we get to the question of
how much waste and inefficiency there
is thought to have been, and some
theories about the motivations behind
the organisation set up to combat it, we
must go back to the start, to well before
January 20th, the day that Donald Trump
was inaugurated for his second term.
In fact, we need to go all the way
back to before Trump even became the
Republican nominee for the 2024 election.
In September 2023, when multiple
candidates were still vying for the
Republican nomination, a fundraising
dinner was held at a former Facebook
executive’s Silicon Valley mansion.
It was a $50,000-a-head fundraiser,
raising money for the campaign
of the former healthcare
entrepreneur, Vivek Ramaswamy.
Elon Musk was one of the guests.
As the evening went on, Musk started
musing on the idea of radically reducing
the size of the federal government.
He had bought Twitter a year
earlier and had embarked on a
radical cost-cutting mission,
culling more than 80% of the staff.
Despite the cries from critics that this
would be the end of Twitter, that Musk
didn’t have the relevant experience with
consumer software or social media to make
it a success, Twitter — since rebranded
as X — didn’t die a painful death.
A flood of advertisers did leave, and it
has had its fair share of growing pains,
but it actually has more active users now
than it did before Elon Musk bought it.
Musk theorised that he could embark
on the same extreme cost-cutting
measures at a governmental level.
And just think of the savings to be made.
Twitter might not have been the most
efficient company, but it was surely
much more efficient than any government.
And the numbers were vastly different:
Twitter had 8,000 or so employees, the
federal government had around 3 million.
It was a different scale, a less
efficient and vastly larger beast, and
all of these savings could be passed
right back to the American people.
This wasn’t a political challenge,
a question of persuading
congressmen and women to support
the cuts at a political level.
It was a technological challenge, he said.
Give me access to the systems, let me
in, and I will find the waste and cut it.
Now, Musk never officially supported
Ramaswamy, and early the following
year, he dropped out of the Republican
nomination race and officially
pledged support to Donald Trump.
On July 13th, 2024, the same day as
the attempted assassination, Elon Musk
publicly tweeted out his support for
Donald Trump’s presidential campaign.
As you will remember, Musk ended up
becoming Trump’s largest financial
backer, spending $290 million to
help Donald Trump win re-election.
This isn’t the time to speculate about his
motivations for this, but before long, the
two men appeared to be joined at the hip.
And one of Trump’s campaign pledges was
to bring in Elon Musk to lead a task force
aimed at reducing government spending.
This was, in many ways, a continuation
of his earlier pledge to “drain
the swamp”, but now it seemed less
politically-motivated, more about
using taxpayer money more efficiently
and for American interests rather
than targeting career politicians.
And sure enough, Trump was re-elected,
and on his first day in office, he
signed an Executive Order establishing
the Department of Governmental
Efficiency - DOGE, for short.
As you might know, the acronym
DOGE is somewhat of a joke.
Doge was an early internet meme–a
picture of a Japanese shiba inu dog
with some text on it–and there was
even a cryptocurrency called Dogecoin,
which was the first “meme coin”.
After Musk and Trump floated the
idea of a “government efficiency
commission,” a user on X suggested
the acronym “DOGE,” and that was it.
It might have seemed like a joke, a
flippant idea created at a dinner party
and hastily turned into reality, but there
was a lot of planning that went into it.
The first question was about how to
structure this department, or commission.
A government clearly isn’t like a company
with a CEO, who can create and dismantle
departments and positions at will.
There are systems of checks and
balances, laws in place to prevent
a rogue actor from coming in and
making sweeping changes that are not
in the best interests of the country.
So Musk and his team had to get creative.
Instead of creating an entirely new
department, which would have been
fraught with legal and political issues,
they took an existing department,
renamed it and expanded its remit.
The United States Digital Service,
or USDS, was created in 2014 under
Barack Obama, and was intended to, and
I’m quoting directly, "deliver better
government services to the American
people through technology and design."
The Executive Order signed by Trump
on his first day in office renamed
it as the United States DOGE Service,
which conveniently meant it could
still have the same initials: USDS.
And within the renamed and reorganised
USDS sat DOGE: the Department
of Governmental Efficiency.
Now, it still isn’t completely clear
what the difference between the USDS
and DOGE is, and there are several other
agencies that sit under or alongside it.
In the interests of simplicity, I’ll
call them all DOGE going forward.
And DOGE had big plans.
In late October of 2024, shortly
before the election, Elon Musk had
claimed that he could cut the federal
budget by at least $2 trillion,
around one-third of its total.
Importantly, $2 trillion is higher
than the discretionary spending budget.
Now, to explain why this is important,
in the United States, federal government
spending is split into three categories:
mandatory spending, discretionary
spending, and interest on government debt.
Mandatory spending refers to the money
that the government is obligated to
spend on its citizens, including programs
such as Social Security and Medicare.
Interest on government debt is the
interest the US government pays on
its bonds, which it is obliged to pay
to maintain faith in the US dollar.
Discretionary spending is the only
category that is “optional”, which can
be increased or decreased by Congress.
This includes things like defence,
foreign aid, transportation and education.
Mandatory spending is around 60% of
the total, discretionary spending
is 27%, and the remaining 13%
is interest on government debt.
Together, it makes up almost $7 trillion
per year, and there was Musk claiming he
could trim this to more like $5 trillion.
Now, there were few people who would
claim that the US government was
this slick, well-oiled machine that
was as efficient as it could be.
Of course, there was waste, of
course, there were people who
weren’t working particularly hard.
Perhaps there were some people
who weren’t doing any work at all.
We’re talking about millions of people,
a vast bureaucracy, a government.
A little waste was to be expected.
But to say that 30% of government spending
was wasteful, especially given that such
a large amount of government spending
is mandatory, with the money going to
people the government is legally required
to give it to, that seemed extreme.
But Elon Musk, even to his greatest
critics, had an established track
record of pushing through change
that was thought to be impossible,
whether it was Twitter, mass-market
electric cars or reusable rockets.
And almost immediately, DOGE got to work.
It was purposefully kept small, with
teams of one team lead, one engineer,
one HR specialist and one lawyer.
These DOGE teams were placed within
federal agencies, but instead of a
traditional, consultant-led approach,
the problem of increasing efficiency
was attacked from a technical angle.
Most often, DOGE employees were
not previously federal workers, and
instead were highly talented, and
often very young, computer programmers.
They were embedded within
government agencies, given access
to government computer systems,
and allowed to get to work.
The hypothesis was that by using AI and
technical wizardry, DOGE would be able
to identify wasteful spending in a way
that previous federal systems would not.
This huge fraud and waste that some
people thought was going on within
the US government would have nowhere
to hide; it would be identified,
stopped, and the savings passed
back to the American taxpayer.
However, almost immediately,
the controversy started.
At the start of February, reports
emerged that DOGE had gained access
to the Treasury Department’s payment
system, which handles everything from
Social Security checks to tax refunds.
This raised alarm bells.
Democratic lawmakers, like Senator
Elizabeth Warren, warned that
giving an unelected group like
DOGE access to such sensitive
information was a recipe for disaster.
What if there were errors?
What if the data was misused?
After all, Musk’s companies,
like SpaceX and Tesla, have
billions in government contracts.
Critics, including unions and consumer
advocacy groups, cried foul, arguing that
this was a massive conflict of interest.
A lawsuit was filed on February
3rd, alleging that DOGE’s
access to the Treasury’s systems
violated federal privacy laws.
And then there were the layoffs.
DOGE didn’t just want to modernise
technology; it wanted to shrink
the federal workforce dramatically.
By April 2025, DOGE claimed to have
saved $150 billion through a combination
of contract cancellations, grant
terminations, and workforce reductions.
But these cuts came at a cost.
For example, the Department of
Health and Human Services saw 20,000
positions slashed, including roles
at the National Institutes of Health,
which funds critical medical research.
One analysis estimated that these
cuts could lead to a $10 billion
loss in economic activity and
44,000 jobs across the country.
After all, these were 44,000 people,
enough to fit a football stadium, who
were now out of work, might now depend
on the government for assistance,
and be radically cutting down their
own discretionary spending on all
the sort of stuff that keeps the
American economy driving forward.
The United States Agency for
International Development, or USAID,
was hit even harder, with most of its
programmes gutted, disbanded completely.
Critics pointed out that these
cuts weren’t just about trimming
fat; they were dismantling
programs that supported vulnerable
populations, both at home and abroad.
By May of 2025, some estimates
linked DOGE’s foreign aid cuts to
300,000 deaths, mostly children.
To this, the reaction of Musk and
Trump can be summed up as “well,
it shouldn’t be up to the American
taxpayer to pay for all this stuff.”
Like it or not, Trump won the election
on an America-first mandate, and this
was nothing if not America first.
And alongside this, there were plenty
of examples of federal government
spending that raised a few eyebrows,
even to Trump’s greatest critics.
Funding for a transgender medical
clinic in India, $20 million to
create a Sesame Street show in Iraq,
or even the discovery that the US
Air Force had been charged $1,300
per reheatable coffee cup by Boeing.
DOGE’s website proudly displayed a
“Wall of Receipts,” listing thousands
of terminated contracts and grants,
with savings they claimed reached
$205 billion by August 2025, a
savings of $1,273.29 per taxpayer.
To many Americans, this was refreshing,
a government finally taking a hard look
at where their tax dollars were going,
and, most importantly, acting to fix it.
Indeed, a March 2025 NBC poll
found that 46% of voters thought
DOGE was a good idea in principle.
But the critics weren’t having it.
They argued that DOGE’s savings
were wildly exaggerated.
Firstly, the $2 trillion figure that
was floated in the days before the
election was reduced to $1 trillion
shortly after DOGE was established,
then to $150 billion by April
2025, a reduction of more than 90%.
And there were claims that it would
actually have a negative effect; there
wouldn’t just be no savings, it would
end up costing the country money.
Independent analyses, like one from
the Internal Revenue Service, warned
that DOGE’s cuts to tax enforcement
could actually increase the federal
deficit by hundreds of billions, as the
IRS would struggle to collect revenue.
In other words, these cost “savings”
would be more than offset by
losses in tax revenue, meaning
the country lost, not saved money.
And then there were the accounting errors
and “creative” savings calculations.
Journalists uncovered billions of
dollars in miscounting, with some
“savings” tied to contracts that had
already been cancelled before DOGE even
existed, and other “savings” accounting
for the absolute maximum that could
possibly be spent, and the real number
almost always coming in much lower.
And then there was what we can
characterise as “The Musk Factor”.
If DOGE was controversial,
its leader was even more so.
Elon Musk, the billionaire behind
Tesla, SpaceX, and X, was the face of
DOGE, even if he was officially just a
“special government employee”, technically
only allowed to work 130 days a year.
His involvement was a double-edged sword.
On one hand, his reputation as a
disruptor gave DOGE credibility among
those who wanted radical change.
He wasn’t a career politician; he
was a modern-day Thomas Edison —a
tech genius and entrepreneur who
had run wildly successful companies.
If anyone was up to the
challenge, it was him.
On the other hand, Musk’s involvement
raised red flags, tainting the project.
His businesses rely heavily on
government contracts; SpaceX alone
has deals worth billions with NASA
and the Department of Defence.
Critics pointed out that Musk’s access
to federal systems could benefit his
companies while harming competitors.
He was, after all, being given
unfettered access to government systems,
something that was perhaps worth
hundreds of billions to his companies.
By April 2025, just a few months
after DOGE was established, the
cracks were starting to show.
Protests erupted across the country,
with chants of “Elon Musk has to
go” heard outside Tesla showrooms.
In Manhattan, demonstrators
waved signs reading “No Trump,
No Musk, No Fascist USA.”
There were organised boycotts of
Tesla, Musk’s electric car company.
Sales dropped dramatically, most
prominently in Europe but also
in the US, and this was followed
by a crash in the share price.
Musk was forced to intervene, and
in April, he announced that he would
be leaving DOGE to focus on Tesla.
By the start of May,
he was officially gone.
Now, although its creator, and the man
most associated with it, is no longer
involved, DOGE is still active, and its
official mandate runs until July 2026.
So, what does the future hold for DOGE?
As of September 2025, although it is not
in the news as much as earlier in the
year, it’s still an important question.
President Trump could extend DOGE’s
mandate with another executive
order, and there’s talk of states
like Oklahoma and Texas launching
their own DOGE-inspired initiatives.
Even some European leaders have
expressed curiosity about the concept,
wondering if a similar approach
could work across the Atlantic.
But the road ahead is far from smooth.
The organisation is still
plagued by legal battles.
And as for public
opinion, it remains split.
Younger Americans especially disapprove
of DOGE, and older, especially
Republican-leaning voters, support it.
For its supporters, DOGE is a bold
experiment in making government
leaner and more accountable, a chance
to finally tackle the bureaucracy
that’s been slowing America down.
For its critics, it is a reckless power
grab, one that risks dismantling vital
services, eroding public trust, and
furthermore, one that looks like it will
even cost, not save, the country money.
Whether it is a stroke of genius or
a spectacular misstep, one thing is
certain: DOGE has sparked a conversation
about what government should be, who it
should serve, and how it should be run.
And that conversation, love it or loathe
it, isn’t going away anytime soon.
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on DOGE.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
What do you think of DOGE?
Do you think it’s a fantastic idea
and that every country should follow
its example, that it was a terrible,
politicised plot, or somewhere in between?
For the members among you, you can head
right into our community forum, which is
at community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.